# SOC302-FINAL-PROJECT
A project analyzing the relationship between a variety of independent variables and their impact on one's belief on abortion rights. 

# Instructions
To access and utilize the script, open the "mitchell-abortion-rights.R" file, which contains the code for my findings. To access the dataset, please utilize the GSS Data Explorer exclusively using variables and data from 2022.

# Data
The primary sampling strategy used by the GSS is cluster sampling to select respondents. It first divides the U.S. into geographic areas, then randomly selects clusters. Within these clusters, households are randomly chosen, and finally, one individual per household is randomly selected for the survey. The complete sample size when cross analyzing between political affiliation, gender, religion, income, confidence in people running healthcare, region of the US in which the interview took place, and belief in abortion rights for any reason resulted in a total of 662 out of the total 4,149 responses in the 2022 GSS population results. When exploring why my dataset is missing responses I noticed a few different explanations. To begin with, in one of my independent variables, political affiliation, 35 respondents did not answer this question meaning we cannot include them. Along with that, in regard to my dependent variable, belief in abortion rights for any reason, 2,367 were inapplicable for the question meaning they may have answered another question which resulted in them not being presented the question in general. Along with that, another 34 respondents simply did not answer the question. When taking this into account and applying this knowledge to the other independent variables that could be missing responses for similar reasons, this explains why my specific dataset does not match the overall population of the GSS.  

# Operationalization
In regard to abortion rights, the GSS provides many variations of contextual abortion rights questions that may change a person's opinion such as the safety of the mother, the cause of the pregnancy, and more. In regard to this study, the dependent variable used was “abany” which poses the question of whether the respondent believes a woman should have the right to receive an abortion for any reason. I chose the variable abortion for any reason because I felt it did the best job encapsulating the overall message of whether respondents believed in abortion rights, without any filter on their reasoning why. The data shows that 59% of those who responded to the question believed, yes, women should have the right to an abortion for any reason. It is interesting to note how the dependent variable is split relatively evenly as compared to the independent variables which have much more variation in responses as seen below.  

My first independent concept, social values, was measured through the GSS variable “Partyid”. There were multiple variations asking respondents for their political affiliation, however I felt “Partyid” was best suited for this study since it gave respondents the most answer choices allowing them to be specific in their responses. For the case of this study, those who selected the political affiliation of either strong democrat, democrat, or independent closer to democrat were re-coded to just “democrat” to represent anyone who felt they aligned closest with the democratic party. As seen through the data, this accounted for 43% of respondents. The same procedure was done for those who identified as a strong republican, republican, or independent closer to republican as it was re-coded into one group called “republican”. Again, as seen through the data, 32% of respondents identified with this group. Lastly, those who identified with either independent (22% of the data) or political other (3% of the data) stayed as they were.  

My second independent concept, social position, was measured in 2 different ways. The first variable used was religion using the GSS variable “Relig” to measure responses. Respondents were given 13 options to choose from that they felt best represented their religious affiliation. The responses protestant, catholic, Christian, and orthodox Christian were re-coded into one variable “Christian" and took up 68% of the data. Those who selected any other religion such as Jewish, Buddhism, Islam, etc. were re-coded into “religion other” and took up about 8% of the data. Those who responded as none (24% of the data) stayed as they were. The second variable used from the GSS was “region” which described which region of the country in which the person lives while taking the survey. Respondents were given 9 specific regions of the country which were re-coded to just “northeast”, “south”, “midwest”, and “west”. The midwest and west portion of the survey accounted for about a quarter of the total respondents for each, while the northeast only took up 14% and the south had the largest portion at 39%.  

My third independent concept, trust in experts, was also measured in 2 different ways. The first variable used was a person’s highest level of education with the GSS variable “educ” being used. This variable allowed respondents to answer their highest level of education from no formal schooling to 8 or more years of college and included every year of school in between and was used as a continuous variable in the study. The second variable was the GSS variable “conmedic” which allowed the respondent to describe their confidence in those running our healthcare systems through 3 options: a great deal, only some, and hardly any. The data shows that half of respondents chose only some confidence in healthcare while 35% chose a great deal of confidence leaving hardly any confidence (15%) being the smallest portion of responses.  
